added the current work in progress with the overview of project origi… (#52)
project-origin/registry: doc/concept/overview.md

![](/resources/graphics/ETTvalue.drawio.png)

## How it has been done so far ?
As the penetration of shares of renewables has increased towards 30% in some countries, the need for a system to certify the energy supplied has become more and more important. The existing system is based on Guarantees of Origin (GO) which are issued yearly and are based on the energy produced in a year. This system has been in place for a long time and is well understood. 

### GO Guarantees of Origin

> The existing system is based on Guarantees of Origin (GO) which are issued yearly and are based on the energy produced in a year. This system has been in place for a long time and is well understood. The system is based on the following principles:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The existing system is based on Guarantees of Origin (GOs), issued monthly as 1 MWh fixed-volume certificates, which can be traded up to one year after being issued [link-ref]. The procedure for GO certification is as follows:
```
missing ref

> 1. The energy produced is certified by a third party issuer compliant with a central authority (AIB), and the certificate is issued to the producer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. A producer of energy requests a certificate for each MWh of energy produced, and a third party issuer, compliant with a central authority (AIB), issues the GO(s) to the producer
```

> 2. The certificate is then sold to the supplier

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. The GO(s) is/are sold to a supplier
```

> 3. The supplier then sells the certificate to the consumer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. The supplier sells the GO(s) to a consumer
```

> 4. The consumer can then use the certificate to claim/retire/cancel that the energy supplied is renewable

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. The consumer can then "use" the GO(s), by claiming, or cancelling it [link-ref], effectively attributing the use of the renewable energy specified by the GO(s) to the consumer.
```

> The existing GO system is based on the following principles:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To summarize, the existing GO system is based on the following principles:
```

- Yearly certification
- Volume based accounting
- Exchange of certificates between parties through a centralised system AIB-hub

> - The certificate is a tradable asset

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The certificate is a tradeable asset
```

> - No direct physical link between the certificate and the energy supplied are required

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- No direct physical link between the certificate and the energy supplied is required
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Challenges  
```

> With the penetration of renewable energy increasing, at times more than 100% of certain grid areas are supplied by renewables, it brings a number of challenges to the existing system: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At times, certain grid areas experience more than 100% supply by renewables, which brings a number of challenges to the existing certification system: 
```

> - Makes it hard to balance the energy grid to 50Hz

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- It becomes difficult to balance the energy grid to 50 Hz
```

- Creates bottlenecks in the existing grid 
- Requires loadbalancing that is less centralized 

> - Makes it hard to validate the actual energy supplied to power-to-x applications and the origin of the losses in the process

Reviewer: Good idea @NicolasENDK - I will move these points to another section, and then add a comment there leading to the further development towards GCs

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Drawbacks
```

> Guarantees of Origin are based on a standard developed by the European Committee for Standardisation (CEN) and the European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardisation (CENELEC) and is called EN 16325. [EECS and the CEN standard EN16325](https://www.aib-net.org/eecs) AIB is the central authority for the GO system in Europe and is responsible for the certification of the issuers and the central hub for the exchange of certificates. [AIB](https://www.aib-net.org/) The regulation is based on the Renewable Energy Directive (RED) and the [REDII - regulation](https://energy.ec.europa.eu/topics/renewable-energy/renewable-energy-directive-targets-and-rules/renewable-energy-directive_en).

Reviewer: I think this paragraph could work even better as the first paragraph after the header, as it is more informative, while the above paragraphs are more analyzing/interpreting

> Guarantees of Origin are based on a standard developed by the European Committee for Standardisation (CEN) and the European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardisation (CENELEC) and is called EN 16325. [EECS and the CEN standard EN16325](https://www.aib-net.org/eecs) AIB is the central authority for the GO system in Europe and is responsible for the certification of the issuers and the central hub for the exchange of certificates. [AIB](https://www.aib-net.org/) The regulation is based on the Renewable Energy Directive (RED) and the [REDII - regulation](https://energy.ec.europa.eu/topics/renewable-energy/renewable-energy-directive-targets-and-rules/renewable-energy-directive_en).

Reviewer: Moved it to the beginning of the section

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Despite the intentions behind the GO certification system, there are several disadvantages to this system. Firstly, the low price of the certificates, which is driven down especially by Norway flooding the market with Gos, based on their extensive amounts of hydro power [hast et al 2015]. This low price does not generate enough economy to create incentives for improvements and investments in renewable energy production facilities. A panel data analysis on 30 European countries also showed no significant relationship between the consumer market for green electricity products supported by the certificates and the development of renewable energy sources.

The physical flow of electricity cannot be tracked, making it difficult to validate the information in the certificates. Additionally, the price of long distance transportation is not taken into account in the certification system. The interconnector capacities are also highly exploited, leading to the traded quantities of electricity attributes being much higher than what could ever be realized in the present interconnector capacities.

Cyprus, Iceland, and Ireland are members of AIB but have no physical interconnection to other AIB countries. Cyprus and Iceland have no interconnectors at all. No physical flows are possible from or to these countries. However, Iceland is a significant exporter of GOs among these countries. In some cases, GO trade even occurs to far away lands such as Australia, Brazil, Chile, China, India, Japan, Qatar, Thailand, Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, and the United States, with no existing interconnector capacities.

This creates a serious inconsistency in the certificates and raises the question, if we cannot document the share of renewable energy in the energy mix in a trustworthy and transparent way, how can we reach binding EU targets for renewable energy shares in the energy mix?

```

> Would be great with a little more analysis into the weaknesses of the GO, and especially why such scheme may not be as trustworthy and transparent as intended, since this is one of the main motivations for doing Project-Origin - I have found several papers, and would love to make a draft for a small section on this. Will proceed with that as soon as possible.

Added a first draft for a section here. Citations are missing.

Reviewer: Link refs added

> It is by no means an extensive and exhaustive analysis of the existing Guarantees of Origin system, but it is a good starting point for understanding the system. Tackling the challenges of the existing system is the basis for the Energy Track and Trace project and a strategy for tackling the challenges is described in the next section.

Reviewer: Would be great with a little more analysis into the weaknesses of the GO, and especially why such scheme may not be as trustworthy and transparent as intended, since this is one of the main motivations for doing Project-Origin - I have found several papers, and would love to make a draft for a small section on this. Will proceed with that as soon as possible.

> It is by no means an extensive and exhaustive analysis of the existing Guarantees of Origin system, but it is a good starting point for understanding the system. Tackling the challenges of the existing system is the basis for the Energy Track and Trace project and a strategy for tackling the challenges is described in the next section.

Reviewer: This section on GOs is highly focused on electricity. Needs a bit of additions/rewrites to focus on several energy types

> ### Strategies that could be applied to the problem

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Strategies for updating the certification system
```

> Several strategies could be applied to the infrastructure to tackle the challenges of the existing system. 

Reviewer: This section taps more into the "how?", while the above is more of the "what?" and "why?" - Hence, we are reaching aspects, where my contributions may be limited

## Challenges in the current and future energy grid
At times, certain grid areas experience a supply by renewables that is [bigger than the grid capacity](https://www.caiso.com/documents/curtailmentfastfacts.pdf), which brings a number of [challenges to the existing, physical grid](https://www.rff.org/publications/explainers/renewables-101-integrating-renewables/): 

- It becomes [difficult to stabilize the grid frequency](https://www.engineering.com/story/grid-frequency-stability-and-renewable-power) in the electricity grid.
- Insufficient capacity of the existing grid creates [bottlenecks](https://www.zerohedge.com/energy/grid-bottlenecks-could-derail-europes-renewable-energy-boom), limiting transportation between certain areas 
- [Less centralized load balancing](https://research.rug.nl/en/publications/local-balancing-of-the-electricity-grid-in-a-renewable-municipali) might be necessary 

> - Makes it hard to validate the actual energy supplied to power-to-x applications and the origin of the losses in the process

Reviewer: Adding comment here again, as it disappeared. Not sure what "origin of the losses" refer to.

Author: It is addressing whether the loss is from a renewable energy source or from conventional energy sources. This is significant when considering hydrolyzers they have a 40% conversion loss.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Makes it hard to validate the origin of the actual energy supplied to power-to-x applications, especially given the losses in the conversion process
```

# Overview of Project-Origin

## Certification of Energy

> _Why bother at all_? one might ask, and argue that the energy supplied in the socket is electrons and its origin whatever is available at the given time, it is all in the residual mix, if I want solar or wind specifically I can simply shift my consumption to hours where there is a high degree of such sources in the residual mix ? A feasible strategy - yes, practical definately not.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_Why bother at all_? one might ask, and argue that the energy supplied in the socket is electrons and its origin whatever is available at the given time, it is all in the residual mix. _If I want solar or wind specifically I can simply shift my consumption to hours, where there is a high degree of such sources in the residual mix_.  A feasible strategy? Yes. Practical? definitely not.
```

This certification system is extremely powerful as it provides trustworthy proofs, and given the [high demand for green energy](https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/us/Documents/energy-resources/us-eri-renewable-energy-outlook-2023.pdf) creates incentives to prioritize supply from renewable sources, while effectively preventing greenwashing. 

The scope of a trustworthy certification system like described above, can be useful in markets for various types of  energy. Additionally, a shared technical solution for certification across energy types creates the basis for coupling across sectors by supporting hybrid and Power-to-X technologies.

This is the basis of Project-Origin - creating a trustworthy, secure certification system that can be shared across energy types, by implementing the fundamental technical core functionality. 
The implementation is provided as available open-source software, to allow anyone to use it, and build any necessary functionality on top to create a certification system able to trace their specific resource(s) in transactions.   

> ![](/resources/graphics/ETTvalue.drawio.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## How it has been done so far ?

> As the shares of renewables in the energy mix of some countries are rising towards 30%, the need for a system to certify the energy supplied in a trustworthy and transparent way becomes increasingly important. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As the share of renewables in the energy mix of some countries are rising [towards 60%](https://energinet.dk/media/2l5jt3lp/%C3%A5ret-der-gik-2022-i-el-og-gas.pdf), the need for a system to certify the energy supplied in a trustworthy and transparent way becomes increasingly important. 
```

Currently, certification is done using [Guarantees of Origin](https://en.energinet.dk/Energy-data/Guarantees-of-origin-el-gas-hydrogen/) (GOs), issued on a monthly basis to an electronic register, and can be traded and/or cancelled up to 12 months after being issued. 
This system has been in place for a long time and is generally well understood. 
However, the GO certification scheme has received lots of criticism, especially evolving around the scheme [lacking credibility](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/5311433), [lacking national implementations of disclosure regulation](https://www.oeko.de/fileadmin/oekodoc/Reliable-Disclosure-in-Europe-Status-Improvements-and-Perspectives.pdf), and having [little to no effect in terms of accelerating investments](https://akjournals.com/view/journals/204/41/4/article-p487.xml?body=contentsummary-24716) in renewable energy production.  
The drawbacks of the GO certification system will be elaborated below. 

### Guarantees of Origin
Guarantees of Origin (GOs) are issued monthly as 1 MWh fixed-volume certificates, which can be traded up to one year after being issued. 

> The rules specifying the format of GOs are provided in the [EN 16325](https://standards.globalspec.com/std/9969735/EN%2016325) standard developed by the European Committee for Standardisation (CEN) and the European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardisation (CENELEC). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The GO certification system is regulated by the [Renewable Energy Directive](https://energy.ec.europa.eu/topics/renewable-energy/renewable-energy-directive-targets-and-rules/renewable-energy-directive_en) (RED-II).
The rules specifying the format of GOs are provided in the [EN 16325](https://standards.globalspec.com/std/9969735/EN%2016325) standard developed by the European Committee for Standardisation (CEN) and the European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardisation (CENELEC). 
```

> The GO certification system is regulated by the [Renewable Energy Directive](https://energy.ec.europa.eu/topics/renewable-energy/renewable-energy-directive-targets-and-rules/renewable-energy-directive_en) (RED-II). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion 
```

the [Association of Issuing Bodies](https://www.aib-net.org/) (AIB) is the central authority for the GO system in Europe, operating a central hub for trading the certificates following the EN 16325 standard. 

The procedure for trading GOs is as follows:

> 1. A producer of energy requests a certificate for each MWh of energy produced, and a third party issuer, compliant with the central authority (AIB), issues the GO(s) to the producer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. A producer of energy requests a certificate for each MWh of energy produced, and the national issuing body for GO's, compliant with the central authority (AIB), issues the GO(s) to the producer
```

2. The GO(s) is/are sold to a supplier
3. The supplier sells the GO(s) to a consumer

> 4. The consumer can then "use" the GO, by claiming, or [cancelling](https://en.energinet.dk/Energy-data/Guarantees-of-origin-el-gas-hydrogen/#accordion-cancellation), effectively attributing consumption of the renewable energy amount specified by the GO to the consumer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. The consumer can then "use" the GO, by [cancelling](https://en.energinet.dk/Energy-data/Guarantees-of-origin-el-gas-hydrogen/#accordion-cancellation), effectively attributing consumption of the renewable energy amount specified by the GO to the consumer.
```

To summarize, the existing GO system is based on the following principles:
- Yearly certification
- Volume based accounting

> - Exchange of certificates between parties through a centralised system AIB-hub

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Exchange of certificates between parties through a centralised system 
```

- The certificate is a tradeable asset

> - No direct physical link between the certificate and the energy supplied is required

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- There is no direct physical link between the certificate and the energy supplied required
```

# Overview of Project-Origin

## Certification of Energy

> _Why bother at all_? one might ask, and argue that the energy supplied in the socket is electrons and its origin whatever is available at the given time. 

Author: ```suggestion
_Why bother at all_? one might ask, and argue that the energy supplied in the socket is electrons and its origin whatever is available at the given time, it is all in the residual mix, if I want solar or wind specifically I can simply shift my consumption to hours where there is a high degree of such sources in the residual mix ? A feasible strategy - yes, practical definately not.
```

> However, leveraging that electricity meters can provide extensive amounts of data - down to an interval of mere minutes - we can separate and document the total amount of electricity provided to the grid at a given time in terms of amounts and their origin at high temporal granularity, on a basis aligned with the spot market. 

Author: ```suggestion
Leveraging that electricity meters can provide extensive amounts of data - down to an interval of mere minutes - we can separate and document the total amount of electricity provided to the grid at a given time in terms of amounts and their origin at high temporal granularity, on a basis aligned with the spot market. 
```

Such documentation enables us to design and create a certification system, making it possible for consumers to prove the source of their consumed electricity at specific time intervals. 
This certification system is extremely powerful as it provides trustworthy proofs, and given the [high demand for green energy](https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/us/Documents/energy-resources/us-eri-renewable-energy-outlook-2023.pdf) creates incentives to prioritize supply from renewable sources, while effectively preventing greenwashing. 

> The scope of a trustworthy certification system like described above, can be useful in markets for various types of  energy. Additionally, a shared technical solution for certification across energy types creates the basis for coupling across sectors by supporting hybrid and Power-to-X technologies.

Author: ```suggestion
The scope of a trustworthy certification system as described above, can be useful in markets for various types of  energy. Additionally, a shared technical solution for certification across energy types creates the basis for coupling across sectors by supporting hybrid and Power-to-X technologies.
```

This system has been in place for a long time and is generally well understood. 
However, the GO certification scheme has received lots of criticism, especially evolving around the scheme [lacking credibility](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/5311433), [lacking national implementations of disclosure regulation](https://www.oeko.de/fileadmin/oekodoc/Reliable-Disclosure-in-Europe-Status-Improvements-and-Perspectives.pdf), and having [little to no effect in terms of accelerating investments](https://akjournals.com/view/journals/204/41/4/article-p487.xml?body=contentsummary-24716) in renewable energy production.  
The drawbacks of the GO certification system will be elaborated below. 

### Guarantees of Origin
Guarantees of Origin (GOs) are issued monthly as 1 MWh fixed-volume certificates, which can be traded up to one year after being issued. 
The rules specifying the format of GOs are provided in the [EN 16325](https://standards.globalspec.com/std/9969735/EN%2016325) standard developed by the European Committee for Standardisation (CEN) and the European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardisation (CENELEC). 

> The GO certification system is regulated by the [Renewable Energy Directive](https://energy.ec.europa.eu/topics/renewable-energy/renewable-energy-directive-targets-and-rules/renewable-energy-directive_en) (RED-II). 

Reviewer: Switched the sentences, hence marking this as resolved

- Exchange of certificates between parties through a centralised system AIB-hub
- The certificate is a tradeable asset
- No direct physical link between the certificate and the energy supplied is required
#### Challenges  
At times, certain grid areas experience a supply by renewables that is [bigger than the grid capacity](https://www.caiso.com/documents/curtailmentfastfacts.pdf), which brings a number of [challenges to the existing, physical grid](https://www.rff.org/publications/explainers/renewables-101-integrating-renewables/): 
- It becomes [difficult to stabilize the grid frequency](https://www.engineering.com/story/grid-frequency-stability-and-renewable-power) in the electricity grid.
- Insufficient capacity of the existing grid creates [bottlenecks](https://www.zerohedge.com/energy/grid-bottlenecks-could-derail-europes-renewable-energy-boom), limiting transportation between certain areas 
- [Less centralized load balancing](https://research.rug.nl/en/publications/local-balancing-of-the-electricity-grid-in-a-renewable-municipali) might be necessary 
- Makes it hard to validate the actual energy supplied to power-to-x applications and the origin of the losses in the process

> #### Drawbacks

Reviewer 2: General comment to this section. We have to be careful not to criticize too much, even though the evidence and argumentation you are bringing in here calls for action...lets see if we can make it a bit more smooth

Reviewer: Thanks for the feedback @NicolasENDK - I will prioritize making this more smooth. I realize that this section is also quite lengthy, which seems unnecessary given that this doc is an overview of "the what and why" for project-origin
